Building a Beginner's Ruby API Toolkit with Sinatra
1. Title & Objective
 Title:
Prompt-Powered Kickstart: Building a Beginner’s Ruby API Toolkit with Sinatra
 Chosen Technology:
Ruby (Language) and Sinatra (Web Micro-Framework)
 Why I Chose It:
I chose Sinatra because it provides a minimal, "batteries-not-included" approach, making it an ideal candidate for a beginner to learn the core concepts of routing, HTTP, and API creation without the complexity of a large framework like Rails. Using Ruby also fulfilled the project requirement of choosing a language outside of Python, Java, and JavaScript.
 End Goal:
The end goal is to create a simple, modular REST API that returns consistent JSON responses and includes fundamental features like a health check and graceful 404 error handling.

2. Quick Summary of the Technology
What is it?
Ruby is a dynamic, open-source programming language with a focus on simplicity and productivity. It has an elegant syntax that is natural to read and easy to write. Sinatra is a free, open-source software web application library and domain-specific language (DSL) written in Ruby. It is classified as a micro-framework because it requires minimal configuration and is not tied to any specific database or components.
Where is it used?
Ruby: Widely used for large-scale web applications (via Ruby on Rails), automation scripts, and server-side processing.
Sinatra: Excellent for building small APIs, lightweight microservices, and dedicated backend services where a full framework is overkill.
One Real-World Example:
Sinatra is often used by companies to create specific, performant API gateways or internal tools that need to be deployed quickly and run efficiently.

3. System Requirements
Requirement
Details
Command to Verify
Operating System
Linux, macOS, or Windows (via WSL/Git Bash)
N/A
Language
Ruby 2.7+
ruby -v
Dependency Manager
Bundler 2.4.22+
bundle -v
Editor
VS Code or preferred text editor
N/A
Testing Tool
Curl or Postman
curl --version


4. Installation & Setup Instructions
Step 1: Install Ruby and Bundler
If Ruby is not installed, use your package manager (e.g., apt for Debian/Ubuntu) to install it, along with the Bundler gem for dependency management.
Step 2: Initialize Project and Create Gemfile
Create a new directory for the project and a Gemfile inside it that specifies the Sinatra dependency.
Step 3: Install Dependencies
Run Bundler to download and install the Sinatra gem.
Step 4: Create Modular Files
Create the necessary directories (data, helpers) and the three core files (app.rb, data/topics.rb, helpers/json_helper.rb) for the modular structure.

5. Minimal Working Example
This project demonstrates a fully modular API with data separation and a JSON helper.
Example Functionality:
The API provides four basic endpoints: /, /health, /topics (all resources), and /topics/:id (single resource). The code separates concerns into three files: data/topics.rb (data source), helpers/json_helper.rb (response formatting), and app.rb (main application logic and routes).
Expected Output
Run the application: ruby app.rb
Test the 404 endpoint using curl:
Bash
curl -i http://localhost:4567/topics/99
Expected Output: (Shows 404 status and JSON body)
HTTP/1.1 404 Not Found
Content-Type: application/json
...
{"error":"Topic ID '99' not found"}



6. AI Prompt used (Learning Reflections)
Prompt Used
Purpose & Strategy
Learning Outcome
"Teach me Ruby as a beginner and show how to create a simple API"
General Learning: This served as the initial "Zero-Shot Prompt" to grasp the foundational syntax of Ruby and connect it immediately to the concept of a web application/API.
Provided Ruby basics and the minimal "Hello World" Sinatra setup, reducing initial setup friction.
"Show me a minimal Sinatra Hello World API"
Scaffolding: A focused instructional prompt to get a runnable piece of code immediately for rapid prototyping.
Gave the core working code required to instantly scaffold the project and confirm the gem installation was successful.
"How do I structure a Sinatra project for multiple endpoints?"
Structural Design: This prompt was crucial for moving beyond a single file and adopting modularity, a key project goal.
Suggested separating code into routes (in app.rb), helpers (for JSON), and data (for topics), leading to a professional project layout.
"How to return consistent JSON responses in Sinatra?"
Best Practice Implementation: An instructional prompt focusing on API consistency and developer-friendliness.
Explained the need for a helper module that sets the Content-Type: application/json header and uses Ruby's built-in .to_json method, ensuring all endpoints return parsable data.
"How to handle missing data or invalid IDs in Sinatra routes?"
Error Handling: Focused on implementing industry-standard error responses.
Recommended returning a 404 Not Found status code along with a descriptive JSON body for requests targeting resources that do not exist (like /topics/99).
"Best way to test Sinatra API endpoints locally"
Verification: A practical, instructional prompt to establish a testing methodology.
Confirmed using command-line tools like curl or external applications like Postman to quickly verify functionality and JSON output without needing a front-end.


7. Common Issues & Fixes
Issue
Initial Error/Symptom
Resolution
Reference
Missing Dependency
cannot load such file -- sinatra (LoadError)
Ran bundle install. The initial Gemfile setup was correct, but the installation step was missed.
Official Sinatra Docs
Port Conflict
== Sinatra has taken the stage on 4567 (then hangs or fails to load)
Used the alternative execution command: ruby app.rb -p 5678 to switch to a free port.
StackOverflow / General UNIX
404 Not Working
Tried to access a topic, but the page returned a generic HTML error instead of my custom JSON 404.
Realized the dependency for the JSON helper was missing in app.rb. The fix was adding the required dependency and declaring the use of the helper.
AI Prompt Journal (Helped trace the dependency issue)



